HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening
and thanks for joining us.
Global security and trade
dominated the two-day
summit of leaders from
20 nations that concluded
in Germany today.
The G-20 meeting in Hamburg
drew large crowds of protesters,
as these gatherings always
do.
But that did not disrupt
the business inside.
NewsHour Weekend special
correspondent Ryan Chilcote
is there with more.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Today, president
trump met with key Asian
allies to discuss the ongoing
threat posed by North Korea and
its long-range missile program.
Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo
Abe called the situation
"increasingly severe."
In a separate meeting with
Chinese President Xi Jinping,
President Trump said of North
Korea's continuing weapons
tests: "Something has
to be done about it."
The leaders also discussed
trade deals and the
$30 billion-a-month
U.S. trade deficit
with China.
PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP:
Many things have happened
that have led to trade
imbalances, and we're
going to turn that around.
I know that with China, in
particular, which is a great
trading partner, we will be able
to do something that will
equitable and reciprocal.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Meeting with
British Prime Minister Theresa
May, Mr. Trump said the U.S.
and UK were also working also
on what he called a "very
powerful" trade deal as the UK
plans its exit from
the European Union.
PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP:
Prime Minister May and
I have developed a very
special relationship,
but I think trade will be a
very big factor between our two
countries, so I want to thank
you very much."
RYAN CHILCOTE: In the summit's
final communique, 19 of the 20
nations - all but the united
states - vowed to implement
quickly and without exceptions
the Paris climate accord
to reduce carbon
dioxide emissions that
cause global warming.
German Chancellor Angela
Merkel said the U.S.
position is "regrettable."
CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL:
Therefore there is the position
of the United States on the
one hand, but I am very
happy that all other
G20 heads of states and
government have agreed
that the Paris agreement
is irreversible."
RYAN CHILCOTE: Merkel played
down the moment when first
daughter Ivanka Trump sat in for
the president during a
meeting about migration
and health in Africa.
The president said the
U.S. would give $50 million
to a World Bank fund
for women entrepreneurs
in developing countries.
Following yesterday's marathon
meeting between President Trump
and Russian President Vladimir
Putin, today I asked Mr.
Putin if he felt Mr. Trump had
agreed with his face-to-face
assertion that Russia
had not intervened in the
U.S. election last year.
PRESIDENT VLADIMIR
PUTIN: He was really
interested in the details.
I replied as
detailed as I could.
I think he was satisfied
with my answers.
Our position is known.
There are no grounds for
saying Russia interfered
in the U.S. election.
HARI SREENIVASAN, PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND ANCHOR:
Our special correspondent
Ryan Chilcote joins
me now from Hamburg, Germany.
Ryan, let's start with that
meeting between Vladimir Putin
and President Donald Trump.
Who controlled the
narrative afterwards on
what exactly happened there?
RYAN CHILCOTE, PBS NEWSHOUR
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT:
What we can say is
that at least from the
Russian side, there was
more of a narrative.
If you think about it, almost
immediately following President
Trump and President Putin's
meeting, the Russian foreign
minister gave a press conference
that was broadcast live
on Russian TV.
On the U.S. side, U.S. Secretary
of State Rex Tillerson a
while later addressed U.S.
reporters but it was audio only.
And then if you think about
today, President Putin gave
a press conference after - as
he was leaving.
He answered a question from me.
He too said that President
Trump, by the way,
it was his impression
agreed that Russia hadn't
intervened in the election.
While as the U.S. delegation,
President Trump simply left.
They didn't have a
press conference at all.
So, the Russians have
certainly been talking about
the meeting a lot more.
And I think, you know, that's
given them an opportunity to
shape how people characterize
it.
SREENIVASAN: One of the story
lines that we've also been
seeing or images of the protests
that have been happening
in Hamburg, how
significant have they been?
CHILCOTE: I think it's fair
to say that the protests
here - and I've been to many,
many, many G20s, G7s - have
really engulfed this city.
And it's a big city, right?
This is Germany's
second largest city.
It's really quite large and
these protests were everywhere.
Everyone said before this summit
began that it was a gamble
on Angela Merkel, the German
chancellor's part to have
this, to have the summit here
in this city, as opposed as
they often do, you know, on
some remote island where it's
difficult for protesters to do
it.
But apparently, she wanted to
send a message to President
Erdogan and other leaders that
Germany is a democratic country
and this is going to go ahead,
which is one of the reasons
they didn't crack down
as much as they could on
some of these protesters.
SREENIVASAN: Is there a way to
judge the standing of the United
States, given that this is now
the president's - one
of his first major
international forays?
CHILCOTE: Well, there's a
real qualitative difference
between what we've seen at this
summit when it comes to U.S.
leadership and how everyone has
sort of perceived and received
the U.S. from the other
summits I've been.
This summit has been
mostly about other G20
leaders trying to convince
the Trump administration
to find some, you know, middle
ground with them on issues
like trade and particularly
on the issue of climate change.
So, it's a real stark
change from what we've
seen in the past.
SREENIVASAN: All right.
Ryan Chilcote joining
us tonight from Hamburg,
Germany, thanks so much.
CHILCOTE: Thank you.